Smcvae (#98)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2022-11-26-SparseMultiChannelVAE.md

pdf: "http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/antelmi19a/antelmi19a.pdf"
---

# Notes

* Here are some (highly) useful links: [repo](https://github.com/ggbioing/mcvae), [video - slider on 1h05](https://youtube.videoken.com/embed/n5e2qNQ-h6E?tocitem=67), [slides](https://icml.cc/media/Slides/icml/2019/hallb(12-16-00)-12-17-00-5118-sparse_multi-ch.pdf)
* This post has been jointly created by Olivier Bernard, Romain Deleat-Besson and Nathan Painchaud.

&nbsp;

# Highlights

* The objective of this paper is to develop a formalism called sMCVAE (sparse multi-channel VAE) to handle with heterogenous data through VAE formulation.
* This is achieved through two major innovations: 

1) Variational distributions of each channel (type of data) are constrained to a common target prior in the latent space to bring interpretability.
> this can be seen as a process of alignment 

2) Parsimonious latent representations are enforced by ***variational dropout*** to make the method computationally advantageous and more easily interpretable.

&nbsp;

# Method

## Starting point

* Observations (e.g. patient information) are composed by subsets of information called channels as follows:

> $$\textbf{x}=\{\textbf{x}_1,\cdots,\textbf{x}_C\}$$ 
> 
> $$\quad \quad$$ where each $$\textbf{x}_c$$ is a $$d_c$$-dimensional vector.

Reviewer: Instead of manually adding spaces, you can simply indent the lines in markdown so that they'll be rendered as part of the current bullet item:
```suggestion
    $$\textbf{x}=\{\textbf{x}_1,\cdots,\textbf{x}_C\}$$ 

    where each $$\textbf{x}_c$$ is a $$d_c$$-dimensional vector.
```

* $$\textbf{z}$$ is a $$l$$-dimensional latent variable which is supposed to be commonly shared by each $$\textbf{x}_c$$

* Every channel brings by itself some information about the latent variable distribution, the posterior $$p(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x})$$ can thus be approximated through the individual distributions $$q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)$$

* Since each channel provides a different approximation, each $$q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)$$ can be constrained to be as close as possible to the target posterior distribution by minimizing the following expression:

> $$\mathbb{E}_{c}[D_{KL}\left( q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c) \parallel p(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_1,\cdots,\textbf{x}_C)\right)]$$
> 
> where $$\mathbb{E}_{c}$$ is the average over channels computed empirically.

Reviewer: Same comment about indentation to preserve the list as above:
```suggestion
    $$\mathbb{E}_{c}[D_{KL}\left( q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c) \parallel p(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_1,\cdots,\textbf{x}_C)\right)]$$

    where $$\mathbb{E}_{c}$$ is the average over channels computed empirically.
```

The following figure illustrates the underlying concept:

![](/collections/images/smcvae/modeling_encoder_side.jpg)

&nbsp;

## Derivation of the ELBO loss

> The minimization of the above equation is equivalent to the maximization of the following Evidence Lower BOund - ELBO (the corresponding demonstration is given in the appendix of this post):

Reviewer: Add link to the appendix for easier navigation:
```suggestion
The minimization of the above equation is equivalent to the maximization of the following Evidence Lower BOund - ELBO (the corresponding demonstration is given in the [appendix of this post](#appendix)):
```

$$\mathcal{L} = \mathbb{E}_{c}\left[\mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)}[log\left(p(\textbf{x} \vert \textbf{z})\right)] - D_{KL}\left( q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c) \parallel p(\textbf{z})\right) \right]$$

> * Making the hypothesis that every channels is conditionally independent from all others given $$\textbf{z}$$, we have:

Reviewer: Unnecessary list + typo:
```suggestion
Making the hypothesis that every channel is conditionally independent from all others given $$\textbf{z}$$, we have:
```

$$p(\textbf{x} \vert \textbf{z})=\prod_{i=1}^{C}p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})$$

$$\mathcal{L}$$ can thus be rewritten as:

$$\mathcal{L} = \mathbb{E}_{c}\left[\mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)}\left[\sum_{i=1}^{C}log\left(p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})\right)\right] - D_{KL}\left( q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c) \parallel p(\textbf{z})\right) \right]$$

&nbsp;

The minimization of $$\mathbb{E}_{c}[D_{KL}( q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c) \parallel p(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}))]$$ is thus equivalent to the minimization of 

$$\mathcal{L^{*}} = \mathbb{E}_{c}\left[D_{KL}\left( q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c) \parallel p(\textbf{z})\right) - \mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)}\left[\sum_{i=1}^{C}log\left(p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})\right)\right]\right]$$

The following figure illustrates the minimization of $$\mathcal{L^{*}}$$:

![](/collections/images/smcvae/core_minimization.jpg)

&nbsp;

![](/collections/images/smcvae/core_minimization_2_1.jpg)
![](/collections/images/smcvae/core_minimization_2_2.jpg)
![](/collections/images/smcvae/core_minimization_2_3.jpg)

&nbsp;

## Reconstruction of missing channels

> * The terms $$\mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)}\left[\sum_{i=1}^{C}log\left(p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})\right)\right]$$  force each channel to the joint decoding of itself and every other channel
> at the same time

Reviewer: I feel like there are words missing here that would help make the explanation clearer:
```suggestion
* The terms $$\mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \textbf{x}_c)}\left[\sum_{i=1}^{C}log\left(p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})\right)\right]$$ force each channel to be able to perform the joint decoding of itself and every other channel at the same time
```

> * This property allows to reconstruct missing channels $$\{\hat{\textbf{x}}_i\}$$ for the available ones $$\{\tilde{\textbf{x}}_j\}$$ as:

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
* This property allows to reconstruct missing channels $$\{\hat{\textbf{x}}_i\}$$ from the available ones $$\{\tilde{\textbf{x}}_j\}$$ as:
```

> $$\hat{\textbf{x}}_i = \mathbb{E}_j\left[\mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \tilde{x}_c)}\left[\left(p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})\right)\right]\right]$$

Reviewer: Indent to align the equation with the list item and not the main text:
```suggestion
    $$\hat{\textbf{x}}_i = \mathbb{E}_j\left[\mathbb{E}_{\textbf{z} \sim q(\textbf{z} \vert \tilde{x}_c)}\left[\left(p(\textbf{x}_i \vert \textbf{z})\right)\right]\right]$$
```

&nbsp;

## Comparison with standard VAE

* In case of $$C=1$$, the proposed sMCVAE model is similar to a classical VAE. 

> * sMCVAE is different from a VAE where all the channels are concatenated into a single one. In that case there cannot be missing channels if we want to infer the latent space variables

Reviewer: Simplify the phrasing here:
```suggestion
* sMCVAE is different from a VAE where all the channels are concatenated together, since such a VAE cannot handle missing channels.
```

> * sMCVAE is also different from a stack of $$C$$ independent VAEs, in which the $$C$$ latent spaces are no more related to each-other. 

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
* sMCVAE is also different from a stack of $$C$$ independent VAEs, where the $$C$$ latent spaces are not related to each other in any way. 
```

> The dependence between encoding and decoding across channels stems from the joint approximation of the posterior distribution

&nbsp;

# Inducing sparse latent representation

## Motivations

* From simulations, the authors found that the lower bound $$\mathcal{L}$$ generally reaches the maximum value at convergence when the number of fitted latent dimensions coincide with the true one used to generate the data

> * They also found that the performance of their method also depends on the effectiveness of the latent space dimensions chosen in relation to the application

Author: I think we can leave the sentence as is

> * They also found that the performance of their method also depends on the effectiveness of the latent space dimensions chosen in relation to the application

Reviewer: If it's the only detail holding us back from publishing the review, then I agree ;) But I'll leave my comment here as a reminder to potentially adress this when completing the section on the sMCVAE itself :wink:

$$p (ln |w|) = const \Leftrightarrow  p (|w|) \propto  \frac{1}{|w|} $$

With this prior, the $$D_{KL}$$ of the dropout posterior depends only on $$\alpha$$ and can be numerically approximated ([Molchanov et al., 2017](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/molchanov17a/molchanov17a.pdf)):

$$D_{KL} (\mathcal{N} (w; \alpha w^2) || p (w) ) ≈ −k_1\sigma(k_2 + k_3 ln \; \alpha) + 0.5 ln(1 + \alpha^{−1}) + k_1 $$

$$k_1 = 0.63576$$, $$k_2 = 1.87320$$, $$k_3 = 1.48695$$, $$\sigma$$(·) Sigmoid function.

The optimization of $$D_{KL}$$ promotes $$\alpha \to \infty $$ ($$\alpha = p/1−p$$), the implicit drop rate $$p$$ tends to 1. The associated weight $$w$$ can be discarded. 

Unless that weight is beneficial for the optimization objective, that is to maximize the data log-likelihood, it will be set to zero.
**Sparsity arises naturally**.

## Sparse Multi-Channel VAE

This part will be completed later (After the post on (Sparse) Variational Dropout).

&nbsp;

# Results

## Medical imaging data

The dataset is composed of

* 504 subjects of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database

> * Clinical channel is complsed by six continuous variables: age, results to mini-mental state examination, adas-cog, cdr, faq tests, scholarship level

Reviewer: Typo + word:
```suggestion
* Clinical channel is composed of six continuous variables: age, results to mini-mental state examination, adas-cog, cdr, faq tests, scholarity level
```

> * Three imaging channels: structural MRI, functional FDG-PET, Amyloid-PET. For each modality, 90 image intensities were computed from 90 brain regions mapped in the AAL atlas. This strategy produces 90 features arrays for each image. Lastly, data was centered and standardized across features. 

Reviewer: The current phrasing makes it a bit ambiguous if 90 intensities are computed for **each** region. So I propose to clarify this:
```suggestion
* Three imaging channels: structural MRI, functional FDG-PET, Amyloid-PET. For each modality, the average image intensity was computed across 90 brain regions mapped in the AAL atlas. This strategy produces 90 features arrays for each image. Lastly, data was centered and standardized across features. 
```

Their sMCVAE was compared with:

> * MCVAE - their model without the sparsity constrain

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
* MCVAE - their model without the sparsity constraint
```

* iVAEs - learning of independant VAE per channel
* VAE - learning a single VAE that takes as input all the channels at once

> For each model class, multi-layer architectures were tested, ranging from 1 up to 4 layers for the encoding and decoding structures, with a sigmoid activation applied to all but last layer. 

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
For each model class, multi-layer architectures were tested, ranging from 1 up to 4 layers for the encoding and decoding structures, with a sigmoid activation applied to all layers but the last. 
```

After training, the latent space for each model was used to classify neurological diseases (MCI and Dementia) by means of ***Linear Discriminant Analysis***. 

> During inference, as far the sMCVAE or the MCVAE are concerned, each channel was used to compute a latent variable $$\textbf{z}_i$$ and the average value was calculated to populate the final latent space used for the classification task

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
During inference, as far the sMCVAE or the MCVAE are concerned, each channel was used to compute a latent variable $$\textbf{z}_i$$, and the average latent variables across channels was then used as input for the classification task
```

For the sparse method, they selected the subspace generated by the most relevant latent dimensions identified by variational dropout $$(p<0.2)$$. Thanks to that, they identified 5 optimal latent dimensions

![](/collections/images/smcvae/medical_results_1.jpg)

&nbsp;

> The encoding of the test set in the latent space given by the sMCVAE model is depicted in the figure below where the visualization is limited to the 2D subspace generated by the two most relevant dimensions

Reviewer: Punctuation:
```suggestion
The encoding of the test set in the latent space given by the sMCVAE model is depicted in the figure below, where the visualization is limited to the 2D subspace generated by the two most relevant dimensions
```

![](/collections/images/smcvae/medical_results_2.jpg)

This subspace appears stratified by age and disease status, across roughly orthogonal directions. 

&nbsp;

> The last figure below illustrates the capacity of the method in reconstructing missing channels by sampling points from two trajectories in the latent space to predict the imaging data channels

Reviewer: I would argue that the figure does not directly showcases the reconstruction of missing channels, as the model's generative capabilities. So I would propose to rephrase the sentence to something like:
```suggestion
The last figure below illustrates the capacity of the method to reconstruct plausible imaging channels when manipulating an original sample to move along interpretable trajectories in the latent space.
```

![](/collections/images/smcvae/medical_results_3.jpg)

> Trajectory 1 ($$T_{r1}$$) follows an aging path centered on the healthy subject group. 

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
Trajectory 1 ($$T_{r1}$$) follows an aging path through the healthy subject group. 
```

> Trajectory 2 ($$T_{r2}$$), starts from the same origin of $$T_{r1}$$ and follows a path were aging is entangled with the pathological variability.

Reviewer: Punctuation + phrasing:
```suggestion
Trajectory 2 ($$T_{r2}$$) starts from the same origin as $$T_{r1}$$, but follows a path were aging is entangled with a progression of the pathological factor.
```

> All the trajectories show a plausible evolution across disease and healthy conditions

Reviewer: Word:
```suggestion
Both trajectories show a plausible evolution across disease and healthy conditions
```

&nbsp;

# Conclusions

> * The authors proposed two innovations in this paper: i) a VAE formalism to deal with heterogeneous data structured as multi-channels; ii) the use of variational dropout to impose sparsity constraints in the latent space

Reviewer: Plural:
```suggestion
* The authors proposed two innovations in this paper: i) a VAE formalism to deal with heterogeneous data structured as multi-channel; ii) the use of variational dropout to impose sparsity constraints in the latent space
```
